.TH OBSERVE LOCAL "15 July 1989"
.ad b
.SH NAME
observe \- observing session planning aid, ephemeris generation, and more.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B observe
[
.BI \-m " longitude_hrs"
[
.I long_min
[
.I long_sec
]
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-l " latitude_hrs"
[
.I lat_min
[
.I lat_sec
]
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-a " altitude_meters"
]
[
.BI \-z " time_zone_hrs"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.B \-d
\fI"start_date"\fR
[
\fI"end_date"\fR
[
.I interval_days
]
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-o[[\fIa\fR][\fIe\fR][\fIi\fR][\fIo\fR][\fIs\fR]] " outfilename_root"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.B \-p
[
[\fIM\fR][\fIV\fR][\fIm\fR][\fIJ\fR][\fIs\fR][\fIU\fR][\fIN\fR]
]
]
[
.BI \-s i
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-f " filename format"
]
[
.BI \-n " object_name"
]


.SH DESCRIPTION
The program is used to prepare for astronomical observations and for
ephemeris calculation.  It can calculate the position of the major
planets, the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn, and minor planets and
comets given either orbital elements or a tabulated ephemeris.
Coordinates of stationary objects may also be input.  It calculates
(approximate) rise and set times, and transit times, of all objects to
be observed.
.PP
The information (coordinates, rise and set times) may be prepared for either
a single time or a sequence of times.
.PP
Output includes a file containing the timetable of events for the evening or
evenings.  The coordinates of the sun and moon, plus any planets, minor
planets, and comets are placed in a readable text file, with other calculated
values for solar system objects (e.g. distance to earth).  The coordinates
of all objects to be observed are placed in files in formats to be read by
the other programs in this family, namely "dataconv" and the starchart
charting programs.  If satellite positions are to be computed, these
coordinates are placed in one file, and a separate PostScript file
graphically showing their positions relative to the primary is also
produced.
.PP
Parameters set the location of the observer, control
what objects are to be observed, and designate the time or times of
interest.
.PP
The file \fIfilename\fR may be in one of several ephemeris
formats for a single object:
.br
.nf
.ta \w'empb    'u
emp	- Format used in the Russian \fIEphemerides of minor planets\fR.
.br
empb	- Format used in the Russian \fIEphemerides of minor planets\fR for
	    bright and unusual asteroids.
.br
aa	- Format used by Astronomical Almanac.
.br
st	- Format commonly used by Sky and Telescope.
.br
iau	- Format commonly used by IAU Circulars.
.fi
.PP
Or it may be contain orbital elements for one or more objects:
.br
.nf
.ta \w'par_e    'u
ell_e	- elliptical orbital elements.
.br
par_e	- parabolic orbital elements.
.fi
.PP
Or it may contain coordinates of fixed objects:
.br
.nf
.ta \w'par_e    'u
obj	-  fixed object coordinates.
.br
.fi
.PP
If the file \fIfilename\fR is in one of the ephemeris formats, it
contains ephemeris data for object named "obj_name".
.PP
Interpolation of the data is performed from the date
specified by the string \fIstart_date\fR until the \fIend_date\fR,
with interval between interpolated points of \fIinterval\fR days.  The
"lineread" and "sif" files contain commands to draw a solid vector
between calculated points, and draw the object symbol and label with
name.
.PP

All ephemeris formats have date RA DEC, then other info.  Date is month in
characters, then date  How the month is encoded is format dependent,
examples include "IX" "Sept." "Sep" "Sep." "September".  Year is
current year unless specified in command line, and is the year of the
first date.  Dates must be in increasing order: 3 followed by 4,
December followed by January.
.PP
The orbital element formats may be used to conveniently calculate
coordinates of asteroids and comets.
.PP
Output files are named \fIoutfile_root.X\fR where X is:
.nf
.ta \w'.sat_PS    'u
altaz	- altitude and azimuth of objects at sunrise and sunset, and
	    morning and evening twilights.
.br
eph	- ephemeris of sun, moon and objects specified.
.br
obs	- observability of objects: rise and set times of objects,
	    twilight times, etc.
.br
star	- "lineread" format file containing coordinates (equinox
	   2000) of the object(s), sun, moon.
.br
sif	- "sif" format file containing the same information as the
	   .star file.  The separation character is ";".
.br
sat	- Locations of the major satellites of Jupiter and Saturn with
	   respect to the primary.
.br
sat_PS	- PostScript file drawing either: one page showing appearance of
	    Jupiter and Saturn with satellites, and relative sizes and
	    orientations of Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn,
	    and the Moon; or several pages showing Jupiter and Saturn
	    with moons on a sequence of times if a range of dates was
	    specified.
.PP
The default \fIoutfile_root\fR is set at compile time.  The usual
default is "planet" for historical reasons.  A character or characters
immediately following the \fB-o\fR option may select a subset of these
files to be output.  The characters "aeios" specify the altaz, eph,
sif, obs, and star files respectively.
.PP
The options controlling the location of the observer are
.TP
.B \-m
Meridian of longitude, measured East of Greenwich.  The USA is West of
Greenwich, and the longitude is negative for all USA locations.
.TP
.B \-l
Latitude.
.TP
.B \-a
Altitude in meters.
.TP
.B \-z
Time zone in hours East of Greenwich, again, this number is negative
for USA locations.  This does not include any effects of daylight
savings.
.fi
.PP
The defaults for these parameters are set when the program is compiled.
.PP
The date or dates of observation in UT are specified with the \fB-d\fR
flag.  The dates for the \fB-d\fR option are each specified as a string
consisting of month, day, and optional year (use if different from the
current year).  The month may be encoded as above, e.g. "Aug" for
august.  Using the first three letters of the English name for the
month always works,  as does the Roman numeral form.  Some other
common abbreviations also work.  The year may also be specified, the
default is the current year.  The day may be fractional, e.g. 1.25 is
6 am UT on the first.  An optional third parameter is the increment of
time to be used in stepping between the two dates.
.PP
The positions of any or all of the major planets at the time(s) may be
calculated.  This is specified either as \fB-p\fR which causes the
positions of all planets to be calculated, or individual planets may
be specified by following the \fB-p\fR with a letter or letters from
the sequence "MVmJsUN".  The positions of the sun and moon are always
calculated, since they always have some effect on observing
conditions.
.PP
The \fB-s\fR option causes the ".sat"and ".sat_PS" files to be
produced for the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn.  \fB-s\fR implies
\fB-p\fR.  With the \fB-si\fR option the drawings in the PS file are
flipped north to south (if for one time) or east to west (if for
multiple times) to produce an inverted view.
.SH EXAMPLES
observe -f cer.empb empb -d "Nov 3" "Nov 5"
.br
observe -si -d "aug 1 1980" "Aug 31"
.br
observe -f asteroids.ell_e ell_e -d "Sep 1" "sep 5" 0.25 -oe test
.br
observe -m -72 33 25 -l 54 40 -a 1050
.SH FILES
See sample data files for formats.
.SH BUGS
Minor corrections such as parallax and nutation are not made.
.PP
Positions are accurate enough for most applications other than
occultations.
.PP
Rise and set times may be off by several minutes.
.PP
Positions opf Saturn's satellites are approximate, good enough for
identification of satellites.
.SH AUTHOR
Craig Counterman
.br
.sp
parts from \fIplanet\fR by
.br
F.T. Mendenhall <ihnp4!inuxe!fred>
.br
Jim Cobb <jcobb@gr.utah.edu>
.br
Alan Paeth <AWPaeth@watCGL>
.SH SOURCES
\fIAstronomical Formulae for Calculators\fR by Jean Meesus
.br
\fIAstronomical Almanac 1989\fR
