.TH STARCHART LOCAL "15 July 1989"
.ad b
.SH NAME
starpost \- print astronomical star charts.
.SH SYNOPSIS
Arguments as in other starchart programs, with the special argument -a:
.br
.B \-a
"\fBm\fR
[
.I mag-1
:
.I mag0
:
.I mag1
:
.I mag2
:
.I ...
]
|
.B \-a
\fBs\fR
[
.I D0
[
.I v0
[
.I k
]]]
|
\fBn\fR
[
.I rad1
:
.I rad2
:
.I rad3
:
.I rad4
:
.I ...
]
|
.BI f " file"
|
.B c
|
\fBl\fR"
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
See starchart(1) for details on the starchart programs in general.
.PP
The additional argument controls include \fBm\fR for magnitude:
with \fBm\fR 0.1 magnitude quanta are used (the default is 1.0
magnitude, e.g. a 4.6 magnitude star is represented by the same symbol
as a star of magnitude 5.4).  The rest of the argument string is
optional, and taken to be a list of floating point numbers separated
by `:' or ` '.  These are taken to be the radii of the symbols for
stars of magnitude -1, 0, 1, 2, 3 etc.  The sizes of symbols for stars
with magnitudes between these magnitudes are determined by linear
interpolation.  Note that the last value given is the value assigned
to all magnitudes fainter than that magnitude. Current default sizes
are "9 8 7 6 5 4 3.25 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5".
.PP
The \fBs\fR argument provides an alternative way of specifying
magnitude symbol sizes, using a formula proposed by Andrew Young in
Sky and Telescope, March 1990, p. 311, D = D0 * 10^(k*(v0 - v)).
He proposes a k of between 0.07 and 0.16, with 0.11 as probably the
best.  If \fBs\fR uses 0.1 magnitude quanta as does \fBm\fR.  The
default values for D0, v0, and k are 0.5 (points), the limiting
magnitude of the main map, and 0.11, respectively.  These may be
altered with the optional arguments to \fBs\fR.
.PP
The \fBn\fR argument is for ``notebook'' mode.  The chart is shifted
to the right on the page, and the ``thumbnail'' map is replaced with
prompts and space for recording observing conditions.  The rest of the
argument string is taken to be a list of floating point numbers
separated by `:' or ` '.  These are taken to be the radii in degrees
of fields of view of the instrument or finder.  Circles with these
radii are drawn, centered on the center of the chart.
.PP
.BI f " file"
may be used to specify an output file, otherwise the postscript
produced is sent to the standard output.
.PP
.B c
may be used to produce color postscript output.
.PP
.B l
may be used to specify landscape mode (as opposed to the default
portrait orientation).  Landscape mode can only used with a
fullpage map.
.PP
.sp
Since the resolution of PostScript is much higher than other common
devices, ``mapwin'' files must be edited when transferred between
starpost and other drivers.  The controls for window width, height,
x_offset and y_offset must be changed.
.PP
The "\fB-a\fR p" or "\fB-a\fR l" option used with "starX11" or
"starXaw" can be used in producing a ``mapwin'' file which can be
converted for use in "starpost" through an "awk" script named
"postconv.awk", provided with the source to this program.

.SH EXAMPLE
starpost -a "n 6:1.5:.5" -a "m9 8 7 6 5 4 3.5 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5" -a "f orion.PS" -c ori -g 5 
.SH BUGS
.SH AUTHORS/EDITORS
Craig Counterman
.br
Alan Paeth, University of Waterloo <AWPaeth@watCGL>
.br
Thanks also to
.br
Poul-Henning Kamp

