.TH STARCHART LOCAL "15 July 1989"
.ad b
.SH NAME
stardsp, starlaser, starpost, starsunv, startool, startek, staruplot,
starX10, starX11, starXaw, starXtk \- print astronomical star charts.
.SH SYNOPSIS
star____
[
.BI \-c " constellation"
[
.I constell_data_file
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-r " R.A."
.BI \-d " Declination"
]
[
.BI \-s " scale"
]
[
.BI \-m "  maglim"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-l " lbllim"
]
[
.BI \-g " grklim"
]
[
.BI \-t " title"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-p
[
.I projection_mode
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-f " user1.star"
[
.I file_format
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-y " yale.star"
[
.I file_format
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-n " neb.star"
[
.I file_format
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-w " planet.star"
[
.I file_format
]
]
[
.BI \-h " index.indx"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-v " center_mag mag_range"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-x " ra_spacing de_spacing"
[
.I ra_origin de_origin
]
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-b
]
[
.BI \-i
]
[
.BI \-u
]
[
.BI \-e " extra_commands_file"
]
.br
.if t .ti +.5i
[
.BI \-a " device_control_string"
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
These programs generate star charts based on data extracted from the Yale
public domain star catalog, the SAO catalog, the RNGC catalog, and
other databases.
Output is to the terminal 
.RI ( stardsp ),
Hewlett-Packard Laserjet printer format
.RI ( starlaser ),
PostScript format
.RI ( starpost ),
Sun Sunview format
.RI ( starsunv ),
Sun Sunview using
.B tooltool
.RI ( startool ),
Tektronix vector format
.RI ( startek ),
Unix Plot(5) format
.RI ( staruplot ),
X Version 10
.RI ( starX10 ),
X Version 11
.RI ( starX11 ),
X Version 11 using Athena widgets
.RI ( starXaw ),
and X Version 11 using Athena widgets with a different interface
.RI ( starXtk ).
.PP
Star data is optionally overlayed with other cosmic objects, such as planets.
If limiting magnitudes are properly set and the databases are available,
NGC objects, constellation boundaries and names, and constellation
patterns are also printed.
.PP
The starchart center is specified by two parameters: Right
Ascension [0.00 to 24.00 hours] and Declination [-90.00 to +90.00 degrees].
An optional scale parameter defines either the N/S range of the output
window, in degrees of declination or the radius of the map in
degrees, depending on the map projection.  Digits after decimal point
are taken as minutes:  object positions can therefore be taken
directly from a star catalog. 
.PP
Other parameters are:
.TP
.B \-r
Right ascension.
.TP
.B \-d
Declination.
.TP
.B \-s
Scale.
.TP
.B \-c
A three or four character mnemonic follows, which is a search string for a
matching line-item entry in the file
.IR constell_data_file .
If found, then the
initial values for Ra, Decl, Scale and Title are taken from that file.
Because the command line is parsed from left to right, subsequent switches
might change the scale, title, or otherwise fine-tune the new defaults.
.TP
.B \-m
Star limiting magnitude. This sets limits on the faintest stars displayed
on the ``master'' view. Default limits are device driver dependent
(more below).  The ``thumbnail'' finder view is set to a related
limit. 
.TP
.B \-l
Name label limiting magnitude. The Yale database contains both a small set of
familiar names (for stars and special objects), plus an extensive list of
labels (Greek Bayer letter or Flamsteed numbers). Star names (including planet
names) always print for this small set. To avoid clutter, the labels may be
omitted below a cut-off magnitude by specifying this value.
.TP
.B \-g
Greek/Flamsteed annotation magnitude. Labels printed for stars dimmer than
this value will use a Bayer or numerical label in favor of a proper name.
The default (2.05) includes nearly all well-known proper names including
Polaris, and excludes but a small number (such as Algol). Large values
generate charts full of obscure Arabian names, small (zero or negative) values
produce non-verbose charts, e.g. ``a'', in Greek where possible, instead of
``Sirius''.
.TP
.B \-t
Title.
.TP
.B \-p
Projection mode.  With no argument, selects STEREOGRAPHIC projection
instead of the default SANSONS.  Argument may be used to select
GNOMONIC, ORTHOGRAPHIC or RECTANGULAR.
.TP
.B \-b
This switch provides a single full-page of output, without a thumbnail-sized
finder map. The legend placard is replaced with a single line banner giving
title, right ascension, declination and limiting magnitude. This mode is
useful for the construction of atlas pages. Because the page depicts the same
vertical scale in degrees of declination, the output will cover a slightly
reduced extent in right ascension.
.TP
.B \-f
The argument is the name of a user-supplied file containing objects in
the yale.star (a.k.a. ``lineread'') format, which will overlay the output.
This is useful for generating asteroid finder charts, planet or
satellite tracks, or other special needs. Files are processed
sequentially. Thus, order may take on meaning for devices which
provide a 2-1/2D page description, such as PostScript.  The file
format may be ``lineread'', ``binfull'', ``binobj'', ``binstar'' or ``gsc''.
.TP
.B \-y \-n \-w \-h
These switches allow for the redefinition of the bright star, nebula,
planet, and star index files, respectively.  The files are in
``lineread'' format unless a \fIfile_format\fR is specified.
.TP
.B \-v
mag range.  The stars in a range of magnitudes are labeled with their
magnitude, as for variable star or asteroid finder charts. The first
argument is the center magnitude, and the second a range: stars within
plus or minus range of the center magnitude are labeled.
.TP
.B \-x
ra_spacing de_spacing [ra_origin de_origin].  A grid is drawn, with arbitrary
spacing in ra and dec.  The optional third and fourth arguments
allow the origin of the grid to be moved.
.TP
.B \-i
invert.  The main map of the chart is dawn with north and south
flipped, to produce an inverted view.
.TP
.B \-e
extra.  The argument is a file containing a detailed description of
the chart, by setting many control variables.  These include those
which may be controlled by command line switches, and many more.
This file may be in either ``mapwin'' format or ``.starrc'' format.
The ``mapwin'' format specifies the detailed configuration of each
map in the chart.
.TP
.B \-a
additional.  This argument is passed to the device dependent routines,
to allow for special controls.  See the man page for the particular
program, e.g. starX11(1).  If the \fB-a\fR argument is supported,
there should be a separate man page.
.TP
.B \-u
user input.  If the program has been compiled for this option,
controls of the sort which may be placed in a ``.starrc'' file may be
typed by the user interactively.  The ``end_input'' command causes the
chart to be drawn, ``quit'' exits the program.
.PP

.SH THE .starrc AND -e CONTROL FILE

Detailed control of the chart is provided through files containing
variable names and values.  A ``.starrc'' file may be used to set
personal preferences.  Additionally, the
.B \-e
argument allows additional files to be read.  These files set
parameters which may be overridden by later command line arguments.
.PP
The \fB-e\fR file may be in ``.starrc'' format or in ``mapwin''
format.  Exact specifications for each map in a chart are contained in
such a ``mapwin'' file.
.PP
For a detailed explanation, see the ``astro.texinfo'' document and the
sample .rc files.

.SH SPECIAL ARGUMENTS
The
.B \-a
argument is used by individual driver programs for device-specific
controls.  See the manual page (if there is one) for that program for
details.

.SH INTERACTION
The \fB-u\fR option activates interactive mode, where the same
commands as in the ``.starrc'' file may be typed to control the
program options.  In addition, ``end_input'' ends interactive input
and draws the chart.  After the chart is drawn, control returns to the
keyboard.  The ``quit'' command exits the program.  The command
``show'' shows the current state of the control variables.  The
command ``help'' may be used to get a brief description of the
commands and controls available.
.PP
Some, especially window based, versions will allow the user final
control over each map of the chart.  The chart is specified by an
array of large \fBC\fR structures, one for each map on the page.  The
``mapwin'' file contains the values in this structure.  Advanced
interactive versions of starchart, such as starXaw, allow the
components of the structures to be edited individually, providing full
access to the flexible controls of the program.
.PP
The sequence of control of the program is:
.br
1) read the ``.starrc'' file.
2) process the command line: options are processed in order, later
arguments may override earlier arguments, additional ``.starrc''
format files are read as they are encountered in \fB-e\fR options.
However, if the file specified in the \fB-e\fR option is in ``mapwin''
format, it is read later.  After the command line is processed, if the
\fB-u\fR option is active, keyboard interaction is performed.  Next,
any ``mapwin'' format files are read.  If there is more interaction
available (e.g. as in starXaw), the details of the chart may now be
controlled.  If a ``mapwin'' file is to be written, it is written now.
Then the chart is drawn to specification.  Finally, after the chart is
drawn, the program returns to the first interaction (i.e. returns to
the point after the command line has been processed).
.PP
One more form of interaction is available on some systems:  A mouse or
other pointing device may be used to either select points on a map and
the coordinates of that point are displayed, or the databases may be
searched for objects near the selected point and the database entries
for the objects found are displayed.
.SH OUTPUT
The present implementations draw two maps: a ``master'' map plus a
``thumbnail'' overview map with brighter limiting magnitude and a larger
coverage area.  Their location and the limiting magnitude is specified
by records in the device driver, allowing the chart layout be tuned on
a per-device basis.  The
.B -b
flag selects a ``fullpage'' option, with a larger ``master'' map and
no ``thumbnail''.
.PP
Objects are represented by glyphs defined by each display driver. Vector-only
devices rely on the parent module ``starimages.c'' to provide shape tables;
other devices plot special characters (stardsp) or private symbols
(PostScript). The latter additionally provides distinctions between object
subclasses, e.g. planetary vs diffuse nebula.
.PP
Sanson's sinusoidal projection is used to map coordinates by default.
This projection preserves both area and linearity in Declination (y axis).
It gives good conformality (angle correctness) near the equator, so it is
useful along the Ecliptic.
Lines of RA converge at the poles (unlike cylindrical projections),
though Cassiopeia and the Dipper reproduce well.
.PP
Alternative projections currently include: stereographic, which
preserves circles and allows an entire hemisphere to be drawn;
orthographic, which may also display an entire hemisphere, but with
great distortion; gnomonic, in which great circles appear as
lines, but distorts for large areas, and rectangular, which is a
direct mapping of longitude and latitude to the map.  Gnomonic is
useful for meteor path plotting charts.  Rectangular is useful for
displaying the entire ecliptic.

.SH EXAMPLES 
.nf
# Sagittarius: a nice bunch of Messier objects.
starpost -c sgr -t Sagittarius >sag.PS
.sp
# Orion: the belt lies near 5h40m in RA, just below the CE.
stardsp -r 5.32 -d -5 -s 12 -t "Trapezium (Orion)" -m 8 -l 5 | more
.sp
# nowhere in particular
starX11 -r 20.15 -d 19.5 -s 12 -m 10 -l 2 -g 6 -t "demo title" -p
gnomonic -f test.star binstar -y alternate.star -w ceres.bin binfull
-v 6 1.5 -x 0.5 5 -b -i -u -e ovverride

.fi
.SH FILES
Note that the names may have been changed for your particular site.
.nf
.ta \w'boundaries.star    'u
yale.star	stellar information (mandatory)
neb.star	nebulae (optional)
planet.star	planets (optional)
boundaries.star	constellation boundaries (optional)
cnames.star	constellation names (optional)
patterns.star	constellation patterns (optional)
index.indx	index file for additional star files (optional)
con.locs	default mnemonic locations
.fi
.br
.sp
These default paths can be easily changed in the Makefile.
.PP
All data file coordinates are for epoch and equinox 2000.0.
.SH BUGS
.PP
If <minutes> part of the parameters is greater than 59 it is silently
truncated to 59.
.SH SEE ALSO
dataconv(1), sif_to_text(1), tosize(1), observe(1).
.SH AUTHORS/EDITORS
Craig Counterman
.br
Alan Paeth, University of Waterloo
.SH MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS
Steve Kennedy
.br
Holger Zessel and Markus Kempf.
.br
Tom Horsley
.br
Dave Van't Hof
.br
Dave Van't Hof
.br
Michael Campanella
.br
Robert Tidd
.br
Joe Wang
.br
Petri Launiainen
.br
Jyrki Yli-Nokari
.br
Sjoerd Mullender
.br
and
.br
Dean Payne <deanp@hplsla.hp.com>
.br
David Smith <smith@hpldrs.hp.com>
.br
Tim Pointing <tim@zorac.dciem.dnd.ca>
.br
and others
