From the first page of the manual:

                          T R E K   7 3

                           Version 4.0

                  A Star Trek Battle Simulation


     Trek73 is a computer-simulated battle based on the famous
Star Trek television series and the board game Star Fleet Bat-
tles.  Via computer terminal, you can clash with enemy battle
cruisers, such as Klingon D-7's and Romulan Sparrowhawks, and use
the same strategies that Captain Kirk has used.  Like Kirk, you
control a Federation vessel similar to the Enterprise; a computer
program directs the enemy.  Victory can fall into several
categories:

     Decisive Victory -- You completely destroy or cripple the
attacking force.

     Tactical Victory -- You out-maneuver the enemy using high-
speed escapes, corbomite bluffs, `play dead' tactics; or the
enemy surrenders.

     Moral Victory -- You surrender or self-destruct and destroy
each other.

     All distances are measured in megameters, one million meters
(abbreviated `M').  Speed is expressed in `Warp Factors'.  Each
warp factor equals 100M per second.[1] All angles are expressed
in common degrees from zero to 360, measured counter-clockwise
from the x-axis, similar to reading a protractor.  Only two
dimensions are used.[2]

     Play is as follows:

     1.  You issue one of a number of commands (fire phasers,
change course, launch antimatter pods, surrender, etc.) by typing
the appropriate code number into the keyboard;

     2.  The enemy, under programmed instructions, issues a simi-
lar command;

     3.  Both your commands are executed (phasers are fired,
probes are launched, damages are assessed, courses changed, etc.)
while the vessels move through space;

     4.  Unless certain end-game conditions are met (you destroy
the enemy, the enemy destroys you, your out-maneuver the enemy,
you both destroy each other, or one party surrenders) the above
steps are repeated.

__________________________
(R) Star Trek is a registered trademark of Paramount Pictures.

(TM) Star Fleet Battles is a trademark held  jointly  by  Task
    Force Games and Amarillo Design Bureau.

 1. Although technically incorrect, it does  save  the  player
    from having to compute cube roots.

 2. This  saves the player from having to work out problems in
    spherical trigonometry.
