.ds c \fIccincl\fP
.ds C \fIccincl\fP
.TH CCINCL 1-ucb
.SH NAME
ccincl \- find #include files
.SH ORIGIN
University of Melbourne
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ccincl
[ options ] ...  file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.sp 1
\*C is a tool to find #included files,
and is intended to be used in conjunction with cake(1).
It goes through the given files and
prints out the names of all #included files.
.SH OPTIONS
.sp 1
.IP \-f
Print the current filename and a colon before every include file found.
.IP \-r
Recursively search every include file found.
.IP "\-ifile"
Ignore file - don't report it and do not recurse on it.
.IP "\-sfile"
Stop recursion at file but do report it.
.IP \-Cdir
Consider the current directory to be dir instead of ".".
.IP \-Idir
Search for include files in the given directory.
Like cpp, \*c searches first the current directory,
then directories given in \-I arguments,
and then /usr/include.
Also like cpp, the current directory is not searched
for inclusions using the <file> syntax.
.PP
\*C detects that two or more different filenames refer to the same file
by checking their inode numbers.
It always uses only one name for a file, the first it encounters.
.PP
\*C 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cake(1)
.SH BUGS
.sp 1
\*C doesn't handle multiple directory jumps very well;
in particular when processing include files in a different directory
it still interprets file names with respect to the current directory,
not with respect to the new directory, as cpp does.
.PP
\*C is in trouble if it finds two files in different filesystems
that have the same inode number.
.\"	@(#)ccincl.l	9/2/85
