.ds u \fIusrc\fP
.ds U \fIUsrc\fP
.TH USRC 1-ucb
.SH NAME
usrc \- find ultimate source files
.SH ORIGIN
University of Melbourne
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usrc
suffix ...  file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.sp 1
\*U is a tool for finding ultimate source files.
It is intended to be used in conjunction with cake(1),
and in particular with the cakefiles Main and System.
It needs to kinds of arguments.
One is a make(1)-style list of suffixes
which describe dependencies between files;
the other is a list of basic filenames
(filenames without any suffixes).
\*U outputs each base name argument
together with the rightmost suffix on the list
for which a file exists.
Since this "explanation" is none too clear, here is an example:
.SH "EXAMPLE"
.sp 1
A typical invocation of \*u would be "usrc .c .l .y file1 file2 file3"
in a directory containing file1.c file2.c file2.y file3.c and file3.l;
for this \*u will output file1.c file2.y file3.l, signifying that
the ultimate source files are file1.c file2.y file3.l and that the
others (file2.c and file3.c) were generated
(by yacc(1) and lex(1) respectively).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cake(1), gsrc(1)
.SH BUGS
.sp 1
Suffix dependencies really form a tree, not a list.
This causes \*u to get confused if two ultimate source files
(i.e. non-generated files) have the same basename
and if they both have their suffix on the list.
Since the Main and System cakefiles run \*u
to identify files which are to be printed,
this is not too serious (unlike tha parallel problem with gsrc(1)).
.\"	@(#)usrc.l	7/7/86
