.na
.TH POSTSCRIPT 1 Rutherford
.SH NAME
postscript \- PostScript interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
PS [ -isc - ] files . . .
.br
postscript [ -isc - ] files . . .
.br
viewer
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I PS
is an interpreter for the PostScript language.
The language is intended for driving laser printers, but this
implementation is for previewing graphics on a suitable device or
for more general programming.
.PP
The implementation conforms to the PostScript Language Manual as
closely as possible.
.PP
.I Postscript
is a version of the interpreter which will talk through a pair of pipes to
a viewer program, possibly running on a different machine.
.PP
.I Postscript looks for the environment variable POSTSCRIPTDEVICE, which may contain
the name of
a two-way device or a command with a vertical bar at the front.
This is ``|viewer'' by default, and may be something like ``|rsh workstation viewer''.
.I Postscript
may be run on a compute server with no display, and
.I viewer
on a workstation.
.PP
To create a window of A4 size, the A4 command may be used.
If this is specified on the command line (e.g. ``PS -c A4''), postscript will not bother to
read its standard input unless told to do so with ``-''.
.SH INVOCATION
When
.I postscript
starts up it performs the following actions:
.PP
It reads a number of definitions from a standard library file.
This file is
.I psrc
in the directory given as the environment variable
.I POSTSCRIPTLIB
(defaults to
.IR /usr/lib/postscript ).
This contains definitions which are part of the PostScript language
and can be defined in PostScript.
In particular, it reads a procedure called
.B executive
which is the top level interpreter used when
.I postscript
is running interactively.
.PP
Next it reads a file called
.I .postscript
from the users HOME directory.
This may contain any useful startup routines that are always wanted.
.PP
Next any arguments are processed off the command line.
These can be a mixture of options and files, and are executed in order.
The options are as follows:
.IP -c
Causes the next argument to be treated as an executable postscript string.
.IP -i
Causes postscript to behave as if its standard input is a terminal,
even if it isn't.
This involves executing the
.B executive
definition from the library.
If this is absent and the standard input is not a terminal and there are
no files or
-c options on the command line, the standard input will be treated as an
ordinary file.
.IP -s
Causes the standard input to be read, even if there are files or commands
on the command line.
.IP -
Same as -s.
.SH CACHING
.PP
This implementation does caching of fonts to disk.
Once a font has been selected and used,
.B savecurrentfont
may be used (without any arguments) to save the current font into the
disk cache.
It saves only those glyphs which have been cached so far, and will fail
if the
.I cache
directory does not contain sub-directories matching the relevant
files in the
.I font
directory.
.PP
Loading from the disk cache is automatic - the system is tolerant about
absent cached fonts, and simply reads the whole font specification instead.
The intention is that the system should be lazy, so that it doesn't do work
unnecessarily.
.SH FONT MAPPING
.PP
Most installations will have a number of fonts which they may wish to use.
Most
.Ps
files will contain font names such as ``Times-Roman'' which are
inconvenient to change.
.Ps
thus contains a dictionary in which name pairs can be placed.
This dictionary called
.B FontMap
is searched when a font is chosen and the font name is replaced by the value
associated with its dictionary entry if one is present;
otherwise the name is not changed.
The reason for this is that a previewer gives only an approximation, so it is sometimes useful
to use differing fonts, even if the widths are slightly wrong.
.PP
Also, during startup, a file called
.B font-map
in the
.Ps
library gets
.B run.
This is assumed to contain default mappings, and may typically be empty.
.SH NEW OPERATORS
.PP
A number of non-standard operators have been added to this version of
the interpreter.
.PP
.B savecurrentfont
has been described already.
.PP
.B setstrokemethod
and
.B currentstrokemethod
allow thin strokes to be done with line drawing rather than the area fill used for
other lines.
The option is an integer.
.B 0
turns off this feature,
.B 1
turns it on and is the default.
.PP
.B A4
and
.B A5
generate new windows of the suggested sizes.
The old window is deleted unless it is being held in a gsave context.
.SH ASSUMPTIONS
There are a number of Assumptions that have been made in the
absence of more specific documentation.
.IP
That Integer and Real values are only equivalent mathematically,
and are normally
distinct except where specified in the manual.
The manual requires equivalence in the following places:
.RS
.IP
The arguments of the arithmetic and mathematical operators.
.IP
The arguments of the relational operators (including
.B eq
and
.BR ne ).
.RE
.IP	
In particular integers and reals are distinguished as dictionary keys.
.IP
That
.B cvrs
is not expected to convert reals to any base.
.IP
That the output from
.B ==
and
.B pstack
can look however we want them to.
.IP
That %stdout and %stderr should not ever be closed - the manual is specific
about %stdin, but not the other two.
.IP
That
.B stop
can exit a
.B run
context.
.IP
That 
.B flushfile
should close an input stream.
.B Read
will close its file if it reads nothing,
but the manual doesn't say whether other operators should.
It is assumed so.
.IP
That access restrictions on files are implemented using the
access restrictions on objects.
.SH FILES
\&~/.postscript \- profile command source
.br
$POSTSCRIPTLIB/psrc \- library of postscript material.
$POSTSCRIPTLIB/font-map \- library of postscript material.
.PP
The
.I POSTSCRIPTLIB
directory may contain:
.IP psrc
The POSTSCRIPT initialisation library.
.IP font
a directory containing font headers, which are executable POSTSCRIPT describing how to load
fonts.
.IP fonts
a directory containing font information.
.IP font-map
a file containing default font name mappings.
.IP cache
a directory containing a corresponding set of cached fonts.
.SH SEE ALSO
.I The PostScript Language Manual,
.I Adobe Systems Incorporated, 1984.
.SH AUTHOR
Crispin Goswell.
Tony Williams provided important guidance.
.SH BUGS
No ``virtual memory'' \- dummy operators which do a gsave and grestore and provided.
.PP
No access protection, the operators are there, but they don't protect anything.
