.TH POSTNEWS 1
.SH NAME
postnews \- submit news articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B postnews
.RB [ -h ]
.RB [ -s
subject]
.RB [ -n
newsgroups]
.RB [ -d
distribution]
.br
.in +9
.RB [ -e
expiredate ..]
.RB [ -r
references]
.RB [ -i
interpfile]
.br
.in -9
.P
.B postnews
.B -c
control_command
.RB [ -n
newsgroups]
.RB [ -d
distribution]
.br
.P
.B postnews
.B -p
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Postnews
submits news articles to the network news system.
Normally
.I postnews
is used interactively, in which case no arguments are required,
and
.I postnews
will prompt the user for the subject, newsgroup and distribution
fields.
If any other fields are required they must be specified on the command
line.
The article text may then be entered, and may be terminated by a `.' or EOT.
Like
.IR mail (1),
commands are available while entering an article, to escape to an
editor, interpolate the current article or run a shell command.
.P
The second two forms of the
.B postnews
command are for news administration use only.
.I Postnews
is often called by
.IR readnews (1)
to post follow-up articles, and post new articles;
many flag arguments are provided for this purpose.
.P
Optional flags are:
.TP
.B -h
is used when input is redirected from a file containing an article.
It specifies that headers are present at the beginning of the article,
and that these headers should be included with the article header instead
of as text.
Only headers the user may set are permitted.
.TP
\fB-s \fIsubject\fR
specifies the subject of the article.
If it is not specified in this way it must be specified interactively.
This must be carefully chosen to be brief yet descriptive.
.TP
\fB-n \fInewsgroups\fR
specifies a comma separated list of newsgroups to which the article
will be posted.
The default is
.BR general .
.TP
\fB-d \fIdistribution\fR
usually not specified, is the same format as a newsgroup,
and is used to restrict the article's distribution to those
hosts which subscribe to the group(s) specified.
.TP
\fB-e \fIexpiredate\fR ..
specifies a date for the article to expire (instead of the usual default).
The format of the date arguments are as follows:
.RS 5
.TP 14
.IR day :
(
.I dayofweek
[ 
.B week
] ) |
.BR 1 .. 31
.RS 2
.TP 14
.IR dayofweek :
.B sunday
| ... | 
.B saturday
|
.B tomorrow
|
.B today
.RE
.TP
.IR month :
.B january
| ... | 
.B december
.TP
.IR year :
.BR 1970 .. 2038
.RE
.P
.RS 5
The arguments
.I day
,
.I month
and
.I year
are order-independent,
and words may be shortened to a non-ambiguous abbreviation.
.P
As the time must be in the future, unspecified
.I day
,
.I month
and
.I year
arguments default to the `next' day, month or year as necessary;
otherwise the current day, month and year are used.
.P
.RE
.TP
\fB-r \fIreferences\fR
usually used by
.IR readnews (1)
when posting a followup article.
.I references
contain the message-id of the article being followed up.
.TP
\fB-i \fIinterpfile\fR
usually used by
.IR readnews (1)
when posting a followup article.
.I interpfile
is the file available to the `.i' command when entering an
article interactively.
.TP
\fB-c \fIcontrol_command\fR
specifies special control commands.
Commands are
\fR`\fBnewgroup \fIgroupname\fR'
to create a new newsgroup (news admin only)
and
\fR`\fBcancel \fImessageid\fR'
to cancel a message (sender or news admin only).
Newsgroups and distribution may be specified to
limit the scope of the control command.
.TP
.B -p
indicates the article on standard input has come from
another host (and contains headers etc.) - news admin only.
.P
When entering an article interactively,
a
.RB \&' . '
or EOT
by itself on a line terminates entering and posts the article.
Other commands are available:
.TP
\&\fB.e\fR
Edit the article collected so far (see
.IR ed (1)).
After editing further lines may be appended to the article.
.TP
\&\fB.i\fR
Interpolate
the file specified by the
.B -i
flag
onto the end of the message. The interpolated item
is indented by four spaces.
.TP
\&\fB.!\fIcmd\fR or \fB!\fIcmd\fR
Shell escape.
.IR Cmd
is executed.
.TP
.B DEL
Causes posting to be aborted, and the article entered so far
is saved in
.BR $HOME/dead.article .
.P
When posting an article, the environment is checked for information
about the sender.
If
.B NAME
is found,
its value is used for the full name, rather than the system value
(found in
.BR /etc/passwd ).
If
.B ORGANIZATION
is found,
the value overrides the system default organization.
An alternative editor (for the
.B .e
command) may be used by setting
.B EDITOR
in the environment.
.P
After local installation of the article,
.I postnews
will transmit the article to all systems that subscribe to the
newsgroups that the articles belong to.
.SH FILES
.ta 24
.nf
/usr/lib/news/active	current newsgroups
/usr/lib/news/seq	contains next sequence number
/usr/lib/news/history	messageids of all articles received
/usr/lib/news/sys	subscriptions lists for other hosts
%news		where the articles are kept
%news/itmp*	temporary articles
$HOME/dead.article	saved article when aborted
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
readnews(1), mail(1), uusend(8), uurec(8).
.SH BUGS
The headers can't be altered by using the `.e' command.
.SH AUTHOR
Michael Rourke, University of N.S.W. (decvax!mulga!michaelr:elecvax)
